Title: "Lack of focus" ?

As a heads-up I should say that I will be bouncing between 2 or 3 or
4 different topics in these pages.

### Biodiversity informatics

My main work now is in "biodiversity information" or "data
aggregation".  This raises a number of challenges around meaning and
intent.  For example, we see two sentences of the form "X is true of
Y", and we want to know whether they are "about" the same thing,
i.e. whether one X means the same as another X.  I'm mainly thinking
of "X" as indicating taxonic grouping of some kind, but you have the
same problem with geographic regions, genes, editions of books and 
databases, and so on.

The problems are:

 1. Often the string "X" occurs in two sentences, but means something
  different in the two.  E.g. X could be "Branta canadensis" and [tbd:
  flesh out this example].
 2. Often different strings "X1" and "X2" are used in sentences, and
 they turn out to be about the same thing, but this is not evident by
 looking at the spellings "X1" and "X2".

There are sometimes ways to determine "what is meant" based on other
nearby data, and methods that help with this are interesting to me.

Also interesting: how the meanings relate to one another: is X1
broader or narrower than X2; are they compatible at all (they could
just come from wildly different areas, e.g. one could be a plant and
the other an animal); do they reflect some confusion about
applicability (they seem to partly coincide, but maybe neither is
strictly more specific than the other).

### Compositional meaning

Most of the issues I come across in data wrangling have parallels in
other fields of endeavor or even in everyday life, so I am always
thinking about how to generalize the heuristics and conceptual
frameworks that I come up with.

I studied the question of "[meaning](3)" a while back and I think it
is not too difficult to understand; it is the role of a signal in
communication, which has to do with an instituted correlation between
a channel state and a world state.  But what is still a mystery to me
is [compositional meaning](4).

### Homomorphisms

Closely related to this is the challenge of making simple formal
systems that cover as many of these meaning-related phenomena as I can
manage to horde.  Currently I'm pursuing the idea that compositional
semantics can be productively seen as some kind of homomorphism (or
'functor') between simple categories.  The categories I have in mind
are just those that account for entities of some kind and their
combination, interaction, or sequencing.  Simplicity is good because
it makes computer programs that tackle difficult questions easier to
right and more likely to be right.

A simple but productive mathematical framework for this kind of thing
seems to be [magmas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magma_(algebra)),
which are practically the same as [McCarthy's 
'S-expressions'](http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/recursive.pdf).

### Interpretation, computation, and life

Computation is in deep with the topics of interpretation and meaning;
a computer is an interpreter for a machine language, a programming
language is interpreted by some interpretation program, and so on.
The question that's been bugging me is: what is the simplest
computer-like thing (mathematical structure I suppose), and what is
the non-computer-like thing that is closest to it?

The same all applies to life: RNA is interpreted as protein, yielding
things like hormones which are interpreted as requesting certain
cellular responses, and so on.  What was the simplest or first
life-like thing, and what non-life chemical systems are adjacent to
it?

I am certainly not the first to make this connection; the list of
relevant writers is long, but I will mention 
[Greg Chaitin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregory_Chaitin) and 
[Hyman Hartman](http://www.hymanhartman.com/) 
([e.g. this](https://doi.org/10.1186/1745-6150-3-16)).
